Improving Multimodal Reasoning via Worst Dimension Optimization
Haocheng Lv,Huaping Zhang,Qiuchi Li,Lei LiandChunxiao Gao ∗
Beijing Institute of Technology
{3120255822, kevinzhang, liqiuchi}@bit.edu.cn, lenny.lilei.cs@gmail.com, gao chunxiao@bit.edu.cn
Abstract
Multimodal reasoning requires a path that retains
integrity over a wide range of constraints, from
visual grounding to logic consistency. However,
the current Process Reward Models (PRMs) fo-
cus on heuristically defined rewards that equally
weigh these factors, which may lead to the con-
cealment of individual dimension failures (such as
visual hallucinations) by the dominating factors,
without guaranteeing the validity of the reasoning
process in general. Therefore, to overcome the lim-
itation, the paper proposes the concept of Multi-
modal Multi-Dimensional Salarization Process Re-
ward Modeling (MMS-PRM), a paradigm specif-
ically developed to enforce the worst dimension’s
robustness in multimodal reasoning. Specifically,
a hierarchical fine-grained reward space is devel-
oped to represent the multimodal risks in the rea-
soning tasks, and a Chebyshev-based Monte Carlo
Tree Search (MCTS) algorithm is introduced, in
which the primary focus during the path searching
is given to the worst-performing dimension. More-
over, a curriculum-based Direct Preference Opti-
mization (DPO) approach is developed to gradually
learn the balanced reasoning skills in the policy.
The experimental results show that, without the di-
mension collapse issue, the MMS-PRM approach
significantly improves the reliability of the multi-
modal reasoning performance and reaches compet-
itive results in various challenging tasks.
1 Introduction
Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs) are shown to
perform well on complex reasoning tasks such as mathemat-
ical diagrams and scientific figures. In contrast to the rea-
soning task on pure-text reasoning, multimodal reasoning re-
quires satisfying multiple constraints simultaneously, includ-
ing visual grounding and logical correctness, where violation
of any single aspect invalidates the entire reasoning trajectory.
To supervise such processes, prior work introduces Process
Reward Models (PRMs) that provide step-level feedback.
∗Corresponding author.
Step1：
Analyze Given Information. The 
problem gives us a triangle ∆ABC 
with specific information: AB = AC, 
∠A = 40○), and DE is the 
perpendicular bisector of AB, 
intersecting AC at point E.
Step2：
Determine ∠ABC and ∠ACB. 
Since AB = AC, triangles ∆ABE and 
∆ACE are congruent due to the 
side-angle-side (SAS) criteria. 
Therefore, ∠ABE = ∠ACE = 40○.
Step5：
Identify Related Angles in Triangle. 
Consider ∆BEC. Since BE bisects 
AC and DE ⟂AC, points E and D 
form an important relationship, 
knowing angles can be divided 
evenly.
score=0.94 score=0.82 score=0.86
...
...
Valid Trajectory
Existing PRM：
MMS-PRM(Our Method)：
...
Invalid Trajectory
Logical Consistency
Visual Grounding
Geometric Validity
...
Monte Carlo Tree Search
Figure 1: Comparison Between Existing Methods and Our Method.
However, existing PRMs[Wanget al., 2025; Luoet al., 2025;
Onget al., 2025; Gaoet al., 2025 ] typically collapse multiple
quality dimensions into a single scalar reward. This makes
it possible for good performance in some factors to compen-
sate bad performance in other factors, which causes incorrect
reasoning paths to be reinforced.
The problem caused by the compensation mechanism is
even more severe in multimodal reasoning tasks. As shown
in Figure 1, the reasoning process can have a mathemati-
cally well-organized reasoning chain with the use of the hal-
lucinated visual relations. Because the text logic is well-
organized, the reasoning process will normally be assigned
with a high confidence score by the scalar PRM, without pun-
ishing the reasoning process for the factual error. The failure
indicates that there is a severe weakness in the current aver-
aging approach for designing the reward.
Such findings lead to the primary tenet in this paper:the
integrity of an active multimodal reasoning trajectory is mea-
sured not by average quality but by the worst active dimen-

sion.An active reasoning step that is valid but unground
in images is inherently invalid and should not be reinforced.
Therefore, successful multimodal alignment should progress
from optimizing for expectation maximization rewards to
non-compensatory goals that punish worst-dimension degen-
eration.
To operationalize this principle, we propose MMS-PRM,
a search-enhanced, multi-dimensional process reward frame-
work for multimodal reasoning. We reformulate multimodal
process rewarding as a multi-objective trajectory optimiza-
tion problem, where the quality of each reasoning step and
consequently the whole reasoning trajectory is governed by
its weakest relevant dimension rather than an aggregated
score. First, we construct a hierarchical, fine-grained re-
ward space that decomposes multimodal reasoning quality
into interpretable dimensions and sub-dimensions, allowing
rewards to be dynamically activated based on the evolving
reasoning context. Second, we introduce a Chebyshev-guided
Monte Carlo Tree Search (MCTS) that explicitly prioritizes
the worst-performing reward dimension during trajectory ex-
ploration, preventing compensation across conflicting crite-
ria and promoting balanced reasoning paths. Finally, we
integrate a curriculum-style Direct Preference Optimization
(DPO) strategy that progressively trains MLLMs with our
obtained balanced reasoning trajectories, from short, high-
confidence trajectories to long-horizon multimodal reasoning
chains.
Through this closed-loop framework, MMS-PRM enforces
balance between visual grounding, logical coherence, and se-
mantic correctness at both step and trajectory levels. Ex-
tensive experiments on diverse and challenging multimodal
reasoning benchmarks demonstrate that MMS-PRM signifi-
cantly improves reasoning reliability and robustness, particu-
larly on long-horizon and visually demanding tasks.
This contributions of this work are as follows:
• We identify a fundamental limitation of scalar process
rewards in multimodal reasoning and reformulate pro-
cess reward modeling as a non-compensatory, multi-
dimensional trajectory optimization problem.
• We propose a worst-dimension-aware search frame-
work that combines hierarchical process rewards with
Chebyshev-scalarized MCTS to enforce balanced multi-
modal reasoning.
• We introduce a curriculum-based preference alignment
strategy that effectively transfers search-discovered rea-
soning behaviors into the model, achieving strong per-
formance and generalization across benchmarks.
2 Related Work
VLM Reasoning.As VLMs continue to be used for increas-
ingly complex tasks in mathematics and science [Yueet al.,
2024b; Wanget al., 2024a ], the need for improving their
reasoning ability has become crucial. Previous studies use
Chain-of-Thought (CoT) reasoning to facilitate complex vi-
sual reasoning tasks, such as constructing CoT datasets for
mathematical diagrams[Zhanget al., 2024b ], aligning visual
regions with reasoning steps[Shaoet al., 2024 ], or decompos-
ing long-chain reasoning via multi-agent frameworks [Dong
et al., 2025]. These advances demonstrate the importance of
modeling intermediate reasoning steps[Zhanget al., 2025b ].
Nevertheless, the majority of the previous studies use coarse-
grained reasoning supervision [Liet al., 2024; Shaoet al.,
2024; Denget al., 2024 ]. In contrast, our work introduces
a fine-grained, structured reasoning paradigm to more pre-
cisely enhance VLM reasoning.
Process Reward Model.With more complex tasks being
addressed by LLMs, there is a need to reason over longer
trajectories, rendering it inadequate to check coherence and
correctness of reasoning using Outcome reward model(ORM)
[Weiet al., 2022; Snellet al., 2024; Luoet al., 2024 ]. This
is overcome by process-based reward models, which offer
dense supervision of reasoning trajectories [Lightmanet al.,
2023]. Early PRM work focuses on objective domains such
as mathematics, where intermediate steps admit clear correct-
ness criteria, either by directly modeling step-wise correct-
ness [Wanget al., 2024b ] or estimating its likelihood [Wang
et al., 2024e; Guanet al., 2025 ]. Recent studies extend
PRMs to multimodal reasoning. VisualPRM [Wanget al.,
2025] aligns intermediate reasoning with visual evidence via
step-level rewards, URSA [Luoet al., 2025 ] integrates pro-
cess supervision into policy learning through reinforcement
learning, while VL-PRM300K [Onget al., 2025 ] and SVIP
[Gaoet al., 2025 ] enable detailed multimodal supervision
with large-scale annotated datasets and visual programming.
The current state-of-the-art in multimodal PRM is based on
scalarized rewards, which may hiding important dimensions.
To address this issue, we introduce the MMS-PRM, which
represents multimodal process-level supervision in a multi-
dimensional reward space to capture the quality of reason-
ing more accurately.Tree-based Search in LLMs.Tree
structures have demonstrated significant potential in language
models [Qiet al., 2024; Wuet al., 2024 ]. Recent efforts ex-
plore applying these tree search methods to identify effec-
tive reasoning paths for MLLMs. AR-MCTS [Donget al.,
2024] enhances multimodal reasoning by integrating MCTS
with active retrieval, but its high computational overhead and
extensive iterations limit its practicality. Similarly, Mulberry
[Yaoet al., 2024a ] distills 260K long-chain reasoning sam-
ples via tree structures from powerful models like GPT-4o,
but relies heavily on resource-intensive teacher models.
3 Method
Multimodal reasoning differs from pure-text reasoning in
that the model must keep every intermediate step visually
grounded, logically coherent, and eventually answer-correct.
This requires supervising both single-step quality and the dy-
namics from steps to the full trajectory. Simple final-answer
supervision may overlook intermediate reasoning errors,
while only step-level supervision may produce locally sound
steps that fail to compose into a globally valid reasoning
chain. To cope with this, we build a closed-loop alignment
framework consisting of three parts: (1) a hierarchical,
fine-grained reward space that models multimodal reasoning
quality at the single-step level via multi-dimensional rewards;
(2) a reward-guided Chebyshev MCTS that dynamically
searches for trajectories balancing all activated reward di-

mensions; and (3) a curriculum-style DPO that progressively
aligns the MLLM policy from easy/short chains to hard/long
chains. The whole pipeline is shown in Figure 2.
3.1 Hierarchical Fine-Grained Reward Space
The first component turns raw model outputs into reusable,
structured reward dimensions.
Candidate Criteria Generation.For each instance in the
training set, we derive criteria based on the reasoning steps.
Given an inputxand a reasoning sequenceˆyproduced by
model sampling, we apply an automated analyzerJ(·), typ-
ically instantiated as a vision-language model, to extract at
most 5 relevant criteria:
J(x,ˆy) ={c 1, c2, . . .},(1)
These criteria assess the reasoning quality, addressing vari-
ous factors such as visual alignment, semantic correctness,
logical consistency, stepwise coherence, and conciseness.
Embedding and Clustering.The criteria gathered are em-
bedded into ad-dimensional vector space:
V(c i) = [v(1)
i , . . . , v(d)
i ],(2)
where d is the embedding dimensionality. hierarchical clus-
tering is performed to group similar criteria together, halting
when the similarity between criteria drops below a certain
thresholdξ. This results in a hierarchical reward structure
H={H 1,H 2, . . .}, where higher levels are broad (e.g., ”vi-
sually grounded”) and lower levels are more specific (e.g.,
”accurately references bar #3”).
Stepwise Reward Allocation.The dynamic process of re-
ward assignment employs a reward treeTto assign stepwise
reward signals. For each stepˆy(t)in then-step reasoning
trajectoryˆy={ˆy(1),ˆy(2), . . . ,ˆy(n)}, the corresponding re-
ward is allocated dynamically.
Specifically, for thet-th stepˆy(t), a selection function first
chooses a coarse-grained parent reward noder parent from the
top level of the reward treeT, representing the primary risk
dimension to be evaluated at this step. Conditioned onˆy(t)
andr parent, an analysis functionΦdetermines whether finer-
grained evaluation is required, and if so, generates a set of
candidate textual evaluation criteria:
Ct = Φ(ˆy(t), rparent),C t ={c 1
t , c2
t , . . . , cKt
t }.(3)
Each criterionc i
t ∈ C t is embedded into ad-dimensional
semantic space using the embedding functionV(·). To fil-
ter out criteria that are weakly related or semantically drifting
away from the selected parent reward, we compute the cosine
distance between each criterion embedding and the parent re-
ward embedding:
δt
i =D

V(c i
t), V(r parent)

,(4)
whereD(·)denotes cosine distance.
This distance-based filtering serves as a heuristic safeguard
rather than a strict semantic entailment test, aiming to remove
candidate criteria that are loosely related to the intended risk
dimension or shift focus away from the core evaluation objec-
tive. Accordingly, the set of activated reward nodes for stept
is defined as:
Rt ={r i
t |c i
t ∈ C t, δ t
i ≤ζ},(5)
where eachr i
t denotes the reward tree node associated with
criterionc i
t, andζis a predefined distance threshold.
Finally, each activated reward noderi
t ∈R t is scored using
a step-level scoring functionS(·):
si(t) =S

ˆy(t), ri
t

,(6)
All step-level reward scores produced by the scoring func-
tionS(·)are initially defined on a discrete scale of[1,10].
To ensure consistency across heterogeneous reward dimen-
sions, we linearly normalize each reward dimension into
[0,1]before any trajectory aggregation or scalarization is ap-
plied. Specifically, a raw scores∈[1,10]is mapped to
˜s= (s−1)/9.
3.2 Dynamic Reward-Guided Chebyshev MCTS
The second component uses search to explore trajectories
that are simultaneously good across all activated dimensions,
where the reward space assigns a multi-dimensional reward
vector to each reasoning step rather than a single scalar or
final outcome.
Chebyshev scalarization.Given a reward vectorv=
(v1, . . . , vM)and an adaptive ideal pointz ∗ = (z∗
1 , . . . , z∗
M),
we first consider the standard Chebyshev scalarization, de-
fined as:
gcheby(v;z ∗) =−max
j

z∗
j −v j

.(7)
However, multimodal reasoning tasks often involve noisy re-
ward signals, where a single isolated misclassification by the
reward model could excessively penalize a valid trajectory
under the strict min-max criterion. To mitigate this noise
and enhance robustness, we employ theAugmented Cheby-
shev Scalarization:
gaug(v;z ∗) =g cheby(v;z ∗)−ρ
MX
j=1
(z∗
j −v j)(8)
whereρis a small positive constant serving as a regulariza-
tion term. This formulation preserves 1. focus on the worst
dimension due to the chebyshev term; 2. for trajectories that
are good on all aspects, the augmented term can capture their
subtle differences and identify the best candidate
MCTS Implementation.The MCTS algorithm constructs
a tree of reasoning steps, where each node corresponds to a
partial reasoning trajectory. In a nutshell, the algorithm dy-
namically searches for the best trajectory based on Chebyshev
scalarized rewards:
•Selection:Starting from the root, the algorithm tra-
verses the tree by selecting the child node that max-
imizes the Upper Confidence Bound applied to Trees
(UCT) score:
UCT(n) =g aug(Rstep(n);z ∗) +c
s
logN(parent(n))
N(n) ,
(9)

Overall Reward
Visual Grounding
 Logic/Reasoning
 Conciseness
Angles Identified 
Accurately
chart elements correctly recognized
colors distinguished 
precisely
Causal Relationship Correct
Internal Consistency Inferential 
Completeness Information Density
Redundancy 
Elimination
Focus Prominence
a) Hierachical Fine-Grained Reward Space
......
b) Dynamic Reward-Guided Chebyshev MCTS
(1) Selection (2) Expansion
 (3) Rewarding
Selected Node Rejected Node
(4) Backpropagation
R = 0.84 R = 0.84
c) Curriculum DPO for Policy Alignment
Adaptive Ideal Point Update
Reward & Criteria Generation
Embedding & Clustering
Image Question
reasoning step 1
reasoning step 2
......
reasoning step t
Worst-dimension Trajectory Optimization 
1
Ideal Point Update
target-aware reward criteria
2
Difficulty Scheduling
sample harder reasoning steps
3
Curriculum DPO
align selected over rejectedpreference pair
Figure 2: Overview of MMS-PRM. The framework consists of three components: (a) a hierarchical, fine-grained reward space that decom-
poses multimodal reasoning quality into interpretable dimensions and assigns step-level rewards; (b) a Chebyshev-guided Monte Carlo Tree
Search (MCTS) that explores reasoning trajectories by explicitly prioritizing the worst-performing dimension; and (c) a curriculum-style
Direct Preference Optimization (DPO) that transfers balanced reasoning behaviors discovered by search into the policy. Together, these com-
ponents form a closed-loop process that enforces non-compensatory, balanced multimodal reasoning.
whereR step(n)denote theM-dimensional reward vector
associated with noden, while the scalarized step quality
is always obtained viagaug(·).ccontrols the exploration-
exploitation trade-off. Here, N(n) represents the number
of node n has been visited, whileN(parent(n))denotes
the visit count of its parent node. The next node is se-
lected vian next = arg maxn′∈children(n) UCT(n′).
•Expansion:Upon reaching a leaf node, we expand the
tree by samplingkcandidate steps{y (t)
1 , . . . , y(t)
k }from
the current policyπ θ(y(t)|x, y(<t)). Each candidate in-
stantiates a new child node.
•Evaluation:For a newly expanded noden, we eval-
uate its immediate quality. Instead of random roll-
outs, we compute the fine-grained process reward vec-
torR step(n). We then apply the Augmented Cheby-
shev Scalarizationg aug(·)to condense this vector into
a scalar, strictly penalizing the worst-performing dimen-
sion while retaining discrimination via regularization.
•Backpropagation:The scalarized value and visit
counts are propagated from the leaf to the root. For ev-
ery node along the path,N(n)is incremented and statis-
tics are updated, dynamically guiding the search toward
paths that are balanced across all reward dimensions.
Adaptive Ideal Point Update.In our approach, the ideal
point serves as a running estimate of the best achievable ob-
jective values observed during the Monte Carlo Tree Search
(MCTS) process. Rather than being fixed, each ideal-point
coordinatez ∗
j is updated to gradually incorporate newly ob-
served rewards, allowing the ideal point to adapt as the search
explores better trajectories. Concretely, at each step of the
MCTS iteration, we update the ideal-point coordinate by
blending its previous value with the rewardv j obtained from
the current simulation using an exponential moving average:
z∗
j ←(1−λ)z ∗
j +λ v j,(10)
where0< λ <1is a smoothing coefficient. controling the
balance between old and new information: a smallλmakes
the ideal point change slowly (high inertia), while a larger
λmakes it track recent rewards more aggressively. For ex-
ample, ifλ→0the update barely movesz ∗
j (we retain the
historical best value), whereasλ→1quickly overrides the
old ideal with the new reward. Equivalently, one can rewrite
(10) as
z∗
j ←z ∗
j +λ(v j −z ∗
j ),(11)
This update movesz ∗
j a fractionλof the “error”(v j −z ∗
j )
toward the newly observed value. In a Chebyshev-scalarized
MCTS framework, trajectories are ranked by their Cheby-
shev scalarized scores with respect to the current reference
pointz ∗, and the best trajectories are selected accordingly.
The objective-wise returnsv j of these selected trajectories
are then used to updatez ∗, allowing it to serve as a global
reference (utopia) point that adapts as the search progresses.

3.3 Curriculum DPO for Policy Alignment
After applying the MCTS algorithm, we obtain an ideal point
z∗ together with a set of candidate trajectories for each input
sample. The third component then converts these searched
trajectories into preference data and aligns the policy using
an easy-to-hard curriculum.
Score fusion and pair construction.Our method allows us
to evaluate the overall quality of any reasoning trajectoryY
via a fused scalar scoreG(Y). Based on this evaluation, pref-
erence pairs(Y +, Y −)are constructed from the searched tra-
jectories produced by MCTS, satisfyingG(Y +)−G(Y −)≥
δ. Giving a reasoning trajectoryY={y (1), y(2), . . . , y(n)},
we define the trajectory-level reward vectorR traj(Y)∈R M
as:
Rtraj(Y) = 1
n
nX
t=1
Rstep(y(t))(12)
where eachR step(y(t))represents theM-dimensional reward
scores (e.g., logical consistency, visual alignment) at stept.
This definition ensures that the trajectory reward maintains
the same dimensionality and physical meaning as the step-
wise rewards. AfterKsimulations, each trajectoryYhas a
fused score
¯G(Y) =η g aug(Rtraj(Y)) + (1−η)R ans(Y),(13)
whereη∈[0,1]is a balancing coefficient.R ans(n)denotes
the outcome correctness reward, defined as1if the reasoning
chain at terminal nodenmatches the ground truth answer,
and0otherwise. For non-terminal nodes,R ans(n)is set to0.
Finally, given multiple reasoning trajectories sampled for
the same inputx, we induce preference pairs(Y +, Y −)for
DPO-style optimization, where the trajectory with a higher
aggregated score is treated as preferred, i.e.,
¯G(Y +)− ¯G(Y −)≥δ.(14)
Warm-up and DPO.Given the constructed preference
pairs(Y +, Y −)derived from the search process, this stage
aims to align the policy with step-level reasoning preferences
through a two-phase training procedure. Specifically, we first
warm up the policy using supervised fine-tuning (SFT) to sta-
bilize generation, and then apply Direct Preference Optimiza-
tion (DPO) to directly optimize the policy toward preferred
trajectories.
LSFT(πθ) =−E (x,Y)
TX
t=1
logπ θ(y(t) |x, y (<t)).(15)
Then we apply DPO with a reference modelπ ref:
L(θ) =−E x,ˆy<t,(ˆy+,ˆy−)∈V

logσ(F + −F −)

(16)
where,
F + =βlog πθ(ˆy+|x; ˆy<t)
πref(ˆy+|x; ˆy<t) (17)
F − =βlog πθ(ˆy−|x; ˆy<t)
πref(ˆy−|x; ˆy<t) (18)
Difficulty scheduling.We define the difficulty of a reason-
ing trajectory based on two intuitive factors: its overall re-
ward quality and its reasoning length.
A trajectory whose reward vector is closer to the ideal point
z∗ corresponds to higher overall reward, and is therefore con-
sidered easier. Similarly, shorter reasoning trajectories gener-
ally indicate simpler reasoning processes and are also treated
as easier cases.
Taking both factors into account, we define the difficulty
score of a trajectoryYas a linear combination of its normal-
ized depth and its distance to the ideal point:
D(Y) =α depth(Y)
Tmax
+ (1−α) ∥z∗ −R traj(Y)∥ 2√
M
,(19)
whereT max denotes the maximum allowed number of rea-
soning steps,Mis the number of reward dimensions, and
Rtraj(Y)represents the aggregated reward vector of trajectory
Y. TheL 2 distance measures how far the trajectory perfor-
mance deviates from the ideal point, and dividing by
√
M
normalizes the term to[0,1].
By construction, a smaller value ofD(Y)indicates an eas-
ier trajectory, while larger values correspond to harder cases.
We use this difficulty score to perform curriculum-style diffi-
culty scheduling during training, prioritizing easier trajecto-
ries in early stages and gradually incorporating harder ones
as training progresses.
Closed-loop training.Searching with the current policy
yields better-balanced trajectories; these trajectories give us
preference data with graded difficulty; the updated policy,
in turn, improves the quality of the search. This closes the
loop and steadily pushes the model toward high-quality mul-
timodal reasoning.
4 Experiment
4.1 Experimental Setup
Implementation details
We employ InternVL-2.5-MPO [Chenet al., 2024b ] as our
base Vision-Language Model (VLM). The supervised fine-
tuning is conducted on ShareGPT-step-300K for one epoch.
Qwen2.5-VL-32B-Instruct is adopted as the backbone of the
Reward and Criteria Generation Model. The BAAI/bge-en-
icl model [Leeet al., 2024 ] is used to construct the embedding
spaceV∈R d, where each element corresponds to a vector
representation of a generated criterion, and the dimensional-
ity is set tod= 4096. To organize these criteria at multiple
granularities, hierarchical clustering is performed using the
BIRCH algorithm [Zhanget al., 1996 ], resulting in a hier-
archical structureHover the criterion embeddings. For the
training time, SFT takes about 9 hours on a single A800 node,
and three rounds of Curriculum DPO takes about 18 hours in
total on a 4 * A100 node. We set branch factork= 3for
a good balance between exploration and computation time.
We set Search DepthD= 10to limit the search space while
maintaining adequate coverage of reasoning paths. We empir-
ically set Reward Parametersη= 0.5,ρ= 0.1, andλ= 0.2
to optimize reasoning quality while avoiding overfitting to
any single dimension.

Table 1: Comparison with open-source VLMs. We evaluate our method on six benchmarks covering both general and task-specific reasoning
capacities. Our CoS has consistently strong performances across these benchmarks, surpassing different baselines and other state-of-the-art
VLMs by large margins. The items in bold and underlined respectively represent the first or second highest scores.
Method Size MathVista MMStar MMMU M3CoT AI2D ChartQA Average
LLaV A-1.5[Liuet al., 2024a ] 13B 27.6 32.8 - 39.5 - - -
IXC-2.5 [Zhanget al., 2024a ] 7B 63.7 59.9 42.9 - 81.5 82.2 -
Ovis1.5-LLaMA3 [Luet al., 2024 ] 8B 63.0 57.3 48.3 - - 76.4 -
LLaV A-CoT[Xuet al., 2025 ] 11B 54.8 57.6 - - 78.7 - -
LlamaV-o1 [Thawakaret al., 2025 ] 11B 54.4 59.5 - - 81.2 - -
Vision-R1-LlamaV [Huanget al., 2025 ] 11B 62.7 61.4 - - - 83.9 -
R1-VL [Zhanget al., 2025a ] 7B 63.5 60.0 - - - 83.9 -
R1-Onevision [Yanget al., 2025 ] 7B 64.1 - - - - - -
MiniCPM-V-2-6 [Yaoet al., 2024b ] 8B 60.6 57.5 49.8 56.0 82.1 79.4 64.2
LLaV A-OneVision[Liet al., 2024 ] 7B 63.2 61.7 48.8 52.3 81.4 80.0 64.6
Qwen2-VL [Wanget al., 2024c ] 7B 58.2 60.7 53.7 57.8 83.0 77.4 65.1
Insight-V [Donget al., 2025 ] 7B 59.9 61.5 50.2 61.5 79.8 81.5 65.7
InternVL-2.5 [Chenet al., 2024b ] 8B 62.2 59.6 54.1 62.4 84.5 84.9 68.0
LLaV A-NeXT-LLaMA3[Liuet al., 2024b ] 8B 45.9 43.1 36.9 45.6 71.5 69.4 52.1
LLaV A-NeXT-LLaMA3 + SFT 8B 51.4 54.7 39.6 67.4 76.1 75.7 60.8
InternVL2.5-MPO [Wanget al., 2024d ] 8B 65.0 60.7 53.8 67.5 84.2 85.0 69.4
InternVL2.5-MPO + SFT 8B 65.9 61.0 53.7 75.7 81.688.371.0
MMS-PRM 8B67.5 65.2 54.2 79.7 84.287.273.0
Benchmarks
We evaluate our method on several representative bench-
marks, spanning a wide range of tasks that demand complex
multimodal reasoning abilities. For most of these bench-
marks, performance is measured by accuracy (or relaxed
accuracy)—i.e., the ratio of correct predictions to total ex-
amples—unless specified otherwise. MathVista [Yueet al.,
2024a] is a well-known benchmark for multimodal mathe-
matical reasoning, focusing on tasks such as plane geometry,
functions, and visual puzzles. MMMU [Yueet al., 2024b ]
evaluates multimodal reasoning across diverse university-
level disciplines. ChartQA [Masryet al., 2022 ] aims to as-
sess logical and numerical reasoning over chart-based visual
data. MMStar [Chenet al., 2024a ] focuses on diverse multi-
modal problems that require fine-grained visual understand-
ing. M3CoT [Shaoet al., 2024 ] evaluates multimodal chain-
of-thought reasoning capabilities. AI2D [Kembhaviet al.,
2016] is designed to test scientific diagram understanding and
reasoning.
4.2 Main Results
Table 1 reports the comparison between MMS-PRM and
state-of-the-art open-source VLMs across six multimodal
reasoning benchmarks. Our method consistently perfor-
mance gains across the majority of benchmarks Starting
from InternVL2.5-MPO, supervised fine-tuning yields lim-
ited gains, indicating that performance is close to satura-
tion under standard training. In contrast, introducing MMS-
PRM leads to consistent improvements across all bench-
marks, demonstrating the effectiveness of search-enhanced,
multi-dimensional process supervision beyond conventional
SFT. The gains are particularly pronounced on reasoning-
intensive benchmarks such as M3CoT and MathVista, which
require long-horizon, multi-step reasoning. This suggests that
MMS-PRM is especially effective at refining complex multi-
modal reasoning behaviors rather than optimizing for final-
answer correctness alone.
Overall, these results show that explicitly balancing multi-
ple reward dimensions at the process level remains a powerful
mechanism for improving strong vision-language models.
4.3 Efficiency and Generalization Analysis
To further validate the practicality of MMS-PRM, we com-
pare it against state-of-the-art multimodal PRMs that re-
quire extensive supervised fine-tuning. As shown in Table 2,
while training-based methods such as Visual-PRM and SVIP
achieve slightly superior accuracy by optimizing billions of
parameters on large-scale step-level datasets, MMS-PRM re-
mains highly competitive despite utilizing a training-free re-
ward mechanism. This design avoids the need for train-
ing a separate reward model, distinguishing it from base-
lines that require optimizing billions of parameters for step-
level supervision. The minor performance trade-off is signif-
icantly offset by our model’s superior deployment efficiency
and its robust generalization across diverse benchmarks, as it
avoids the risk of overfitting to specific training distributions
or reward hacking. Consequently, MMS-PRM offers a more
resource-efficient and scalable paradigm for real-world mul-
timodal reasoning.
4.4 Ablation Study
We perform ablation studies on the M3CoT validation set
to analyze the contribution of each component in MMS-
PRM. As shown in Table 3, introducing the hierarchical fine-
grained process rewards consistently improves the SFT base-
line, indicating the effectiveness of step-level supervision for
multimodal reasoning. Further incorporating reward-guided
Chebyshev MCTS leads to additional gains, demonstrating

Table 2: Comparison with state-of-the-art multimodal PRMs. Our
method achieves competitive performance using a training-free pro-
cess reward model, whereas baselines require extensive supervision
to train their reward models.
Method PRM Trainable Params MathVista MMMU
Visual-PRM 7B 68.5 60.2
SVIP 7B 61.6 61.3
URSA 8B 64.9 -
VL-PRM300K 8B 65.7 56.5
MMS-PRM 0M67.5 54.2
Table 3: Ablation study results on the M3CoT validation set.
Configuration Acc. (%)
Baseline (SFT) 67.4
+ Hierarchical reward 70.1
+ Reward + Chebyshev MCTS 73.6
MMS-PRM (full)79.7
DPO only (w/o MCTS) 71.2
Weighted-sum MCTS 75.3
that explicitly searching for balanced reasoning trajectories
is more effective than direct optimization. Compared with
weighted-sum MCTS, Chebyshev scalarization achieves bet-
ter performance, suggesting that penalizing the weakest re-
ward dimension is crucial for multimodal reasoning. Finally,
the full MMS-PRM framework, which combines hierarchi-
cal rewards, Chebyshev MCTS, and curriculum-style DPO,
achieves the best performance. In contrast, removing MCTS
and applying DPO alone results in a noticeable drop, high-
lighting the necessity of search-based trajectory optimization.
4.5 Impact of Reward Count
We further investigate the impact of supervision density by
analyzing the average reward counts. In this experiment, we
control the density of process supervision by explicitly con-
straining the number of output rewards in the prompt pro-
vided to the criteria generation model. Specifically, we ad-
just the instructions to request a varying number of crite-
ria—ranging from a strict constraint (e.g., ”output only the
single most critical criterion”) to a relaxed setting that en-
courages generating comprehensive criteria across multiple
dimensions. As shown in Table 4, the reasoning performance
consistently improves as the average number of activated pro-
cess rewards increases from 1.0 to 4.22. Here, the average
values are induced by prompt-level constraints on the num-
ber of generated criteria (e.g., exactly 1, 1–3,≤5, and 3–5),
rather than being directly set. This trend indicates that MMS-
PRM benefits significantly from joint multi-dimensional con-
straints.
4.6 Worst-Dimension Analysis
We analyze the minimum reward dimensionv min = minj vj
of final trajectories generated by Chebyshev-guided MCTS
and weighted-sum MCTS under identical rollout budgets and
Avg Rewards / Step MathVista M3CoT ChartQA Avg.
1.0 65.8 74.1 86.4 74.8
2.1 66.9 76.3 87.1 76.1
3.4 68.2 78.888.477.8
4.270.1 79.787.279.6
Table 4: Effect of reward dimensionality measured by the average
number of activated rewards per reasoning step.
reward models. As shown in Figure 3, Chebyshev scalariza-
tion consistently shifts the distribution ofv min toward higher
values, indicating that the weakest reward dimension is sig-
nificantly improved. In contrast, weighted-sum MCTS ex-
hibits a heavier tail in the low-v min region, suggesting that
severe failures in individual dimensions can be masked by
strong performance in others. This confirms that Chebyshev-
based optimization effectively enforces balanced multimodal
reasoning by penalizing worst-dimension collapse rather than
allowing compensation across dimensions.
Figure 3: Distribution of the minimum reward dimensionv min
across reasoning trajectories
5 Conclusion
This paper introduced MMS-PRM, which replaces superficial
scalar rewards with fine-grained, multi-dimensional supervi-
sion via Chebyshev-scalarized MCTS. By integrating trajec-
tory optimization with curriculum alignment, our framework
effectively balances visual and logical reasoning, achieving
competitive results and robust generalization. These findings
highlight the critical role of structured process rewards and
search mechanisms in advancing reliable, interpretable mul-
timodal reasoning.
References
[Chenet al., 2024a ] Lin Chen, Jinsong Li, Xiaoyi Dong, Pan
Zhang, Yuhang Zang, Zehui Chen, Haodong Duan, Jiaqi
Wang, Yu Qiao, Dahua Lin, et al. Are we on the right way
for evaluating large vision-language models?Advances in

Neural Information Processing Systems, 37:27056–27087,
2024.
[Chenet al., 2024b ] Zhe Chen, Weiyun Wang, Yue Cao,
Yangzhou Liu, Zhangwei Gao, Erfei Cui, Jinguo Zhu,
Shenglong Ye, Hao Tian, Zhaoyang Liu, et al. Expanding
performance boundaries of open-source multimodal mod-
els with model, data, and test-time scaling.arXiv preprint
arXiv:2412.05271, 2024.
[Denget al., 2024 ] Linger Deng, Yuliang Liu, Bohan Li,
Dongliang Luo, Liang Wu, Chengquan Zhang, Pengyuan
Lyu, Ziyang Zhang, Gang Zhang, Errui Ding, et al. R-cot:
Reverse chain-of-thought problem generation for geomet-
ric reasoning in large multimodal models.arXiv e-prints,
pages arXiv–2410, 2024.
[Donget al., 2024 ] Guanting Dong, Chenghao Zhang,
Mengjie Deng, Yutao Zhu, Zhicheng Dou, and Ji-Rong
Wen. Progressive multimodal reasoning via active
retrieval.arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.14835, 2024.
[Donget al., 2025 ] Yuhao Dong, Zuyan Liu, Hai-Long Sun,
Jingkang Yang, Winston Hu, Yongming Rao, and Ziwei
Liu. Insight-v: Exploring long-chain visual reasoning
with multimodal large language models. InProceedings
of the Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Confer-
ence, pages 9062–9072, 2025.
[Gaoet al., 2025 ] Minghe Gao, Xuqi Liu, Zhongqi Yue,
Yang Wu, Shuang Chen, Juncheng Li, Siliang Tang, Fei
Wu, Tat-Seng Chua, and Yueting Zhuang. Benchmarking
multimodal cot reward model stepwise by visual program.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.06606, 2025.
[Guanet al., 2025 ] Xinyu Guan, Li Lyna Zhang, Yifei Liu,
Ning Shang, Youran Sun, Yi Zhu, Fan Yang, and Mao
Yang. rstar-math: Small llms can master math rea-
soning with self-evolved deep thinking.arXiv preprint
arXiv:2501.04519, 2025.
[Huanget al., 2025 ] Wenxuan Huang, Bohan Jia, Zijie Zhai,
Shaosheng Cao, Zheyu Ye, Fei Zhao, Zhe Xu, Yao Hu, and
Shaohui Lin. Vision-r1: Incentivizing reasoning capabil-
ity in multimodal large language models.arXiv preprint
arXiv:2503.06749, 2025.
[Kembhaviet al., 2016 ] Aniruddha Kembhavi, Mike Sal-
vato, Eric Kolve, Minjoon Seo, Hannaneh Hajishirzi, and
Ali Farhadi. A diagram is worth a dozen images. InEuro-
pean Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV), pages 235–
251, 2016.
[Leeet al., 2024 ] Chankyu Lee, Rajarshi Roy, Mengyao Xu,
Jonathan Raiman, Mohammad Shoeybi, Bryan Catanzaro,
and Wei Ping. Nv-embed: Improved techniques for train-
ing llms as generalist embedding models.arXiv preprint
arXiv:2405.17428, 2024.
[Liet al., 2024 ] Bo Li, Yuanhan Zhang, Dong Guo, Ren-
rui Zhang, Feng Li, Hao Zhang, Kaichen Zhang, Peiyuan
Zhang, Yanwei Li, Ziwei Liu, et al. Llava-onevision: Easy
visual task transfer.arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.03326,
2024.
[Lightmanet al., 2023 ] Hunter Lightman, Vineet Kosaraju,
Yuri Burda, Harrison Edwards, Bowen Baker, Teddy
Lee, Jan Leike, John Schulman, Ilya Sutskever, and Karl
Cobbe. Let’s verify step by step. InThe Twelfth Interna-
tional Conference on Learning Representations, 2023.
[Liuet al., 2024a ] Haotian Liu, Chunyuan Li, Yuheng Li,
and Yong Jae Lee. Improved baselines with visual instruc-
tion tuning. InProceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference
on computer vision and pattern recognition, pages 26296–
26306, 2024.
[Liuet al., 2024b ] Haotian Liu, Chunyuan Li, Yuheng Li,
Bo Li, Yuanhan Zhang, Sheng Shen, and Yong Jae Lee.
Llavanext: Improved reasoning, ocr, and world knowl-
edge, 2024.
[Luet al., 2024 ] Shiyin Lu, Yang Li, Qing-Guo Chen, Zhao
Xu, Weihua Luo, Kaifu Zhang, and Han-Jia Ye. Ovis:
Structural embedding alignment for multimodal large lan-
guage model.arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.20797, 2024.
[Luoet al., 2024 ] Liangchen Luo, Yinxiao Liu, Rosanne
Liu, Samrat Phatale, Meiqi Guo, Harsh Lara, Yunxuan Li,
Lei Shu, Yun Zhu, Lei Meng, et al. Improve mathemat-
ical reasoning in language models by automated process
supervision.arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.06592, 2024.
[Luoet al., 2025 ] Ruilin Luo, Zhuofan Zheng, Yifan Wang,
Xinzhe Ni, Zicheng Lin, Songtao Jiang, Yiyao Yu, Chufan
Shi, Ruihang Chu, Jin Zeng, et al. Ursa: Understanding
and verifying chain-of-thought reasoning in multimodal
mathematics.arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.04686, 2025.
[Masryet al., 2022 ] Ahmed Masry, Do Long, Jia Tan, and
Shafiq Joty. Chartqa: A benchmark for question answering
about charts with visual and logical reasoning. InFindings
of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL,
pages 2263–2279, 2022.
[Onget al., 2025 ] Brandon Ong, Tej Deep Pala, Vernon Toh,
William Chandra Tjhi, and Soujanya Poria. Training
vision-language process reward models for test-time scal-
ing in multimodal reasoning: Key insights and lessons
learned.arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.23250, 2025.
[Qiet al., 2024 ] Zhenting Qi, Mingyuan Ma, Jiahang Xu,
Li Lyna Zhang, Fan Yang, and Mao Yang. Mutual reason-
ing makes smaller llms stronger problem-solvers.arXiv
preprint arXiv:2408.06195, 2024.
[Shaoet al., 2024 ] Hao Shao, Shengju Qian, Han Xiao,
Guanglu Song, Zhuofan Zong, Letian Wang, Yu Liu, and
Hongsheng Li. Visual cot: Advancing multi-modal lan-
guage models with a comprehensive dataset and bench-
mark for chain-of-thought reasoning.Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems, 37:8612–8642, 2024.
[Snellet al., 2024 ] Charlie Snell, Jaehoon Lee, Kelvin Xu,
and Aviral Kumar. Scaling llm test-time compute opti-
mally can be more effective than scaling model parame-
ters.arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.03314, 2024.
[Thawakaret al., 2025 ] Omkar Thawakar, Dinura Dis-
sanayake, Ketan Pravin More, Ritesh Thawkar, Ahmed
Heakl, Noor Ahsan, Yuhao Li, Ilmuz Zaman Mohammed

Zumri, Jean Lahoud, Rao Muhammad Anwer, et al.
Llamav-o1: Rethinking step-by-step visual reasoning in
llms. InFindings of the Association for Computational
Linguistics: ACL 2025, pages 24290–24315, 2025.
[Wanget al., 2024a ] Ke Wang, Junting Pan, Weikang Shi,
Zimu Lu, Mingjie Zhan, and Hongsheng Li. Measur-
ing multimodal mathematical reasoning with math-vision
dataset.arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.14804, 2024.
[Wanget al., 2024b ] Peiyi Wang, Lei Li, Zhihong Shao,
Runxin Xu, Damai Dai, Yifei Li, Deli Chen, Yu Wu, and
Zhifang Sui. Math-shepherd: Verify and reinforce llms
step-by-step without human annotations. InProceedings
of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics (V olume 1: Long Papers), pages 9426–
9439, 2024.
[Wanget al., 2024c ] Peng Wang, Shuai Bai, Sinan Tan, Shi-
jie Wang, Zhihao Fan, Jinze Bai, Keqin Chen, Xuejing
Liu, Jialin Wang, Wenbin Ge, et al. Qwen2-vl: Enhanc-
ing vision-language model’s perception of the world at any
resolution.arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.12191, 2024.
[Wanget al., 2024d ] Weiyun Wang, Zhe Chen, Wenhai
Wang, Yue Cao, Yangzhou Liu, Zhangwei Gao, Jinguo
Zhu, Xizhou Zhu, Lewei Lu, Yu Qiao, et al. Enhancing
the reasoning ability of multimodal large language mod-
els via mixed preference optimization.arXiv preprint
arXiv:2411.10442, 2024.
[Wanget al., 2024e ] Zihan Wang, Yunxuan Li, Yuexin Wu,
Liangchen Luo, Le Hou, Hongkun Yu, and Jingbo Shang.
Multi-step problem solving through a verifier: An empiri-
cal analysis on model-induced process supervision.arXiv
preprint arXiv:2402.02658, 2024.
[Wanget al., 2025 ] Weiyun Wang, Zhangwei Gao, Lianjie
Chen, Zhe Chen, Jinguo Zhu, Xiangyu Zhao, Yangzhou
Liu, Yue Cao, Shenglong Ye, Xizhou Zhu, et al. Visual-
prm: An effective process reward model for multimodal
reasoning.arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.10291, 2025.
[Weiet al., 2022 ] Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuur-
mans, Maarten Bosma, Fei Xia, Ed Chi, Quoc V Le,
Denny Zhou, et al. Chain-of-thought prompting elicits
reasoning in large language models.Advances in neural
information processing systems, 35:24824–24837, 2022.
[Wuet al., 2024 ] Jinyang Wu, Mingkuan Feng, Shuai
Zhang, Feihu Che, Zengqi Wen, and Jianhua Tao.
Beyond examples: High-level automated reasoning
paradigm in in-context learning via mcts.arXiv preprint
arXiv:2411.18478, 2024.
[Xuet al., 2025 ] Guowei Xu, Peng Jin, Ziang Wu, Hao Li,
Yibing Song, Lichao Sun, and Li Yuan. Llava-cot: Let vi-
sion language models reason step-by-step. InProceedings
of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer
Vision, pages 2087–2098, 2025.
[Yanget al., 2025 ] Yi Yang, Xiaoxuan He, Hongkun Pan,
Xiyan Jiang, Yan Deng, Xingtao Yang, Haoyu Lu,
Dacheng Yin, Fengyun Rao, Minfeng Zhu, et al. R1-
onevision: Advancing generalized multimodal reason-
ing through cross-modal formalization.arXiv preprint
arXiv:2503.10615, 2025.
[Yaoet al., 2024a ] Huanjin Yao, Jiaxing Huang, Wenhao
Wu, Jingyi Zhang, Yibo Wang, Shunyu Liu, Yingjie Wang,
Yuxin Song, Haocheng Feng, Li Shen, et al. Mulberry:
Empowering mllm with o1-like reasoning and reflection
via collective monte carlo tree search.arXiv preprint
arXiv:2412.18319, 2024.
[Yaoet al., 2024b ] Yuan Yao, Tianyu Yu, Ao Zhang,
Chongyi Wang, Junbo Cui, Hongji Zhu, Tianchi Cai,
Haoyu Li, Weilin Zhao, Zhihui He, et al. Minicpm-
v: A gpt-4v level mllm on your phone.arXiv preprint
arXiv:2408.01800, 2024.
[Yueet al., 2024a ] Xiang Yue, Yuansheng Ni, Kai Zhang,
Tianyu Zheng, Ruoqi Liu, Ge Zhang, Samuel Stevens,
Dongfu Jiang, Weiming Ren, Yuxuan Sun, et al.
Mathvista: Evaluating mathematical reasoning of foun-
dation models in visual contexts.arXiv preprint
arXiv:2402.14804, 2024.
[Yueet al., 2024b ] Xiang Yue, Yuansheng Ni, Kai Zhang,
Tianyu Zheng, Ruoqi Liu, Ge Zhang, Samuel Stevens,
Dongfu Jiang, Weiming Ren, Yuxuan Sun, et al. Mmmu:
A massive multi-discipline multimodal understanding and
reasoning benchmark for expert agi. InProceedings of
the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pat-
tern Recognition, pages 9556–9567, 2024.
[Zhanget al., 1996 ] Tian Zhang, Raghu Ramakrishnan, and
Miron Livny. Birch: an efficient data clustering method for
very large databases.ACM sigmod record, 25(2):103–114,
1996.
[Zhanget al., 2024a ] Pan Zhang, Xiaoyi Dong, Yuhang
Zang, Yuhang Cao, Rui Qian, Lin Chen, Qipeng Guo,
Haodong Duan, Bin Wang, Linke Ouyang, et al. Internlm-
xcomposer-2.5: A versatile large vision language model
supporting long-contextual input and output.arXiv
preprint arXiv:2407.03320, 2024.
[Zhanget al., 2024b ] Renrui Zhang, Xinyu Wei, Dongzhi
Jiang, Ziyu Guo, Shicheng Li, Yichi Zhang, Chengzhuo
Tong, Jiaming Liu, Aojun Zhou, Bin Wei, et al. Mavis:
Mathematical visual instruction tuning with an automatic
data engine.arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.08739, 2024.
[Zhanget al., 2025a ] Jingyi Zhang, Jiaxing Huang, Huanjin
Yao, Shunyu Liu, Xikun Zhang, Shijian Lu, and Dacheng
Tao. R1-vl: Learning to reason with multimodal large lan-
guage models via step-wise group relative policy optimiza-
tion.arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.12937, 2025.
[Zhanget al., 2025b ] Ruohong Zhang, Bowen Zhang, Yang-
hao Li, Haotian Zhang, Zhiqing Sun, Zhe Gan, Yinfei
Yang, Ruoming Pang, and Yiming Yang. Improve vi-
sion language model chain-of-thought reasoning. InPro-
ceedings of the 63rd Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics (V olume 1: Long Papers),
pages 1631–1662, 2025.

6 Supplementary Material
6.1 Prompt Details
To support the hierarchical and fine-grained reward construc-
tion described in Section 3.1, we explicitly design two types
of prompts: a criteria generation prompt and a criteria selec-
tion prompt. These prompts operationalize the abstract re-
ward modeling framework into concrete, executable proce-
dures that can be reliably applied at scale.
The criteria generation prompt is responsible for mapping a
set of low-level, semantically related evaluation criteria into
a concise, interpretable cluster name. This step corresponds
to the embedding and hierarchical clustering stage of the re-
ward space construction, where multiple fine-grained signals
are abstracted into higher-level reward dimensions. By con-
straining the output to a short academic-style phrase and en-
forcing a strict JSON format, we ensure both semantic clarity
and downstream parsability.
The criteria selection prompt serves as a strict step-level judge
that assigns scores to reasoning steps using only the activated
reward criteria. It enforces non-compensatory supervision
by requiring the evaluator to explicitly penalize hallucina-
tions, logical gaps, and unsupported claims, even when par-
tial progress is made. The calibration rules and selection con-
straints are designed to avoid score inflation and to preserve
meaningful variance across reward dimensions, which is cru-
cial for the worst-dimension optimization strategy adopted in
MMS-PRM.
Together, these prompts instantiate the dynamic reward allo-
cation mechanism described in the main paper, enabling con-
sistent step-level evaluation across heterogeneous multimodal
reasoning trajectories.
Criteria Generation Prompt:
You are a cluster naming assistant for visual reasoning
reward categories.
Summarize the common theme across the given child
category names into a short English cluster name.
Prefer precise, academic-style vocabulary such as
Logical Consistency, Mathematical Manipulation,
Conceptual Understanding, Reasoning Accuracy, Visual
Recognition Correctness, Temporal Reasoning, Spatial
Understanding.
Output STRICT JSON only: ”name”: ”¡cluster name¿”.
Criteria Selection Prompt:
You are a strict step-level judge for math and diagram
reasoning.
Given the candidate reasoning step below, evaluate it
using ONLY criteria from the CANDIDATE LIST.
Calibration (use the full 1–10 range):
1–2: off-topic, hallucinated, or contradicts known facts.
3–4: clear error(s) or unjustified leap; harms solution.
5: neutral restatement/setup with no measurable
progress.
6–7: minor progress with issue(s) or unverifiable
claim(s).
8: solid, correct progress; improves solution measurably.
9–10: exceptional, critical progress; precise, verified,
and necessary.
Guidelines:
Prefer criteria that directly match the step content.
Penalize fillers, repetition, vague statements, and unsup-
ported claims.
If any error/irrelevance/contradiction exists, reflect it in
at least one low score.
Avoid clustering all scores between 7–9 unless the step
is truly excellent.
Selection:
From the CANDIDATE LIST, choose between 3 and 5
of the MOST relevant criteria.
If the selected reward criteria are too coarse-grained or
not fully applicable, you should generate more specific
fine-grained process reward criteria and justify your
choice.
Final output requirements:
Produce a single final line listing the chosen criteria and
their scores.
Format strictly as: Criterion A: [[X]] – Criterion B:
[[Y]] – ...
Use ’ – ’ to separate multiple criteria.
[[...]]MUST appear only in the final line; no extra text.
6.2 Curriculum DPO Implementation
Algorithm 1 provides a concrete implementation of the
curriculum-style Direct Preference Optimization (DPO) pro-
cedure introduced in Section 3.3. While the main paper fo-
cuses on the conceptual design of difficulty-aware alignment,
the supplementary algorithm details how difficulty scores are
computed from MCTS trajectories and how they are inte-
grated into the training loop.
Specifically, the algorithm consists of two stages. In the
offline difficulty construction stage, final reasoning trajecto-
ries obtained from Chebyshev-guided MCTS are decomposed
into prefixes, from which both trajectory depth and multi-
dimensional reward statistics are collected. These statistics
are then combined to compute a normalized difficulty score
that jointly reflects reasoning length and deviation from the
current ideal point.
In the curriculum-aware DPO training stage, preference pairs
are progressively exposed to the policy according to their dif-
ficulty ranking. Early training focuses on short, high-quality

Algorithm 1Curriculum DPO with MCTS-based Difficulty
Require:MCTS node trajectories, DPO datasetD dpo, diffi-
culty weightα, curriculum range[γ start, γend]
Ensure:Trained policyπ θ
1:Stage 1: Offline Difficulty Construction
2:foreach final reasoning trajectoryRin MCTS logsdo
3:Collect intermediate nodes whose reasoning prefix
matchesR
4:Compute maximum depth:d(R)←max t dt
5:Compute trajectory reward:R traj(R)← 1
T
PT
t=1 st
6:end for
7:Compute global statistics:
8:T max ←max R d(R)
9:z ⋆ ← 1
N
P
R Rtraj(R)
10:foreach DPO sample with chosen responseRdo
11:Compute difficulty score:
12:difficulty(R)←α· d(R)
Tmax
+ (1−α)· ∥Rtraj(R)−z⋆∥2√
M
13:Attach difficulty to the DPO sample
14:end for
15:Stage 2: Curriculum-aware DPO Training
16:Sort all DPO samples by ascending difficulty
17:LetD sorted ={x (1), . . . , x(K) }
18:fortraining stept= 1toTdo
19:Compute training progress:p←min(1, t/T)
20:Determine allowed difficulty fraction:γ(p)←γ start +
p(γend −γ start)
21:Compute visible set size:k←max(1,⌊γ(p)·K⌋)
22:Define visible curriculum subset:D vis ←
{x(1), . . . , x(k)}
23:Sample a preference pair(x, y +, y−)fromD vis
24:Updateπ θ using standard DPO loss
25:end for
trajectories, while later stages gradually introduce longer and
more challenging reasoning chains